HCF – It is important to note that HCF of the given numbers cannot be greater than any one of them.
LCM – It is important to note that LCM of the given numbers cannot be smaller than any one of them.
If 1 is the HCF of 2 numbers, then their LCM will be their product.
For two co prime numbers, the HCF is always 1

HCF in case of only two numbers:
Suppose the question asks to calculate the HCF of any two numbers. Then Divide the larger number by the smaller one.
Now divide the divisor by the remainder.
Keep dividing the preceding divisor with the remainder until a Zero remainder is obtained.
The last divisor obtained will be the HCF of those two given number.

HCF in case of more than two numbers:
The HCF of these two numbers and the third number will be the HCF of all three numbers and so forth.
Choose any two numbers and find their HCF by applying the above-mentioned method.
The rule for Solving HCF and LCM Questions and Answers:
 Calculate the multiples or the factors of the larger number until one of them is also a multiple of the smaller number.
Then multiply all these factors, and the resultant will be the LCM of the given numbers.

HCF and LCM Tips and Tricks and Shortcuts
The H.C.F of two or more numbers is smaller than or equal to the smallest number of given numbers
The smallest number which is exactly divisible by a, b and c is L.C.M of a, b, c.
The L.C.M of two or more numbers is greater than or equal to the greatest number of given numbers.
The smallest number which when divided by a, b and c leaves a remainder R in each case. Required number = (L.C.M of a, b, c) + R
The greatest number which divides a, b and c to leave the remainder R is H.C.F of (a – R), (b – R) and (c – R)
The greatest number which divide x, y, z to leave remainders a, b, c is H.C.F of (x – a), (y – b) and (z – c)
The smallest number which when divided by x, y and z leaves remainder of a, b, c (x – a), (y – b), (z – c) are multiples of M
Required number = (L.C.M of x, y and z) – M

Product of two numbers = H.C.F x L.C.M
